Let's review what state is.
State means the intermediate data maintained between records.
When we talk about stateful stream processing it means a state is
shared between events and past events can
affect the way current and future events are processed.
You can easily think about aggregations like a total count of a key in given interval.
For example, stateful systems should keep track of user sessions or windows like
aggregate events coming from the same window and perform counts
like counting the number of key values in every window and more.
These metrics can be check pointed.
In a stateless stream processing,
each event is processed independently.
One of the advantages of this independence
is that the application can be easily scaled up.
This is because a stream data can be processed by
multiple processors with the help of simple load balancing.
When there is higher throughput in the system,
you can easily scale up and launch multiple processors.
The main difference between these two stream processing types is that you always
want to store the state when you're engaged in stateful stream processing.